Prometheus Bound by Aeschylus
Translated by Elizabeth Barrett Browning (1806
- 1861)
Recording by Expatriate in Bangor, Maine
SCENE.--_STRENGTH and FORCE, HEPHÆSTUS and
PROMETHEUS, at the
Rocks._
_Strength._ We reach the utmost limit of the
earth,
The Scythian track, the desert without man.
And now, Hephæstus, thou must needs fulfil
The mandate of our Father, and with links
Indissoluble of adamantine chains
Fasten against this beetling precipice
This guilty god.
Because he filched away
Thine own bright flower, the glory of plastic
fire,
And gifted mortals with it,--such a sin
It doth behove he expiate to the gods,
Learning to accept the empery of Zeus
And leave off his old trick of loving man.
_Hephæstus._ O Strength and Force, for you,
our Zeus's will
Presents a deed for doing, no more!--but _I_,
I lack your daring, up this storm-rent chasm
To fix with violent hands a kindred god,
Howbeit necessity compels me so
That I must dare it, and our Zeus commands
With a most inevitable word.
Ho, thou!
High-thoughted son of Themis who is sage!
Thee loth, I loth must rivet fast in chains
Against this rocky height unclomb by man,
Where never human voice nor face shall find
Out thee who lov'st them, and thy beauty's
flower,
Scorched in the sun's clear heat, shall fade
away.
Night shall come up with garniture of stars
To comfort thee with shadow, and the sun
Disperse with retrickt beams the morning-frosts,
But through all changes sense of present woe
Shall vex thee sore, because with none of
them
There comes a hand to free.
Such fruit is plucked
From love of man! and in that thou, a god,
Didst brave the wrath of gods and give away
Undue respect to mortals, for that crime
Thou art adjudged to guard this joyless rock,
Erect, unslumbering, bending not the knee,
And many a cry and unavailing moan
To utter on the air.
For Zeus is stern
And new-made kings are cruel.
_Strength._ Be it so.
Why loiter in vain pity?
Why not hate
A god the gods hate? one too who betrayed
Thy glory unto men?
_Hephæstus._ An awful thing
Is kinship joined to friendship.
_Strength._ Grant it be;
Is disobedience to the Father's word
A possible thing?
Dost quail not more for that?
_Hephæstus._ Thou, at least, art a stern
one: ever bold.
_Strength._ Why, if I wept, it were no remedy;
And do not _thou_ spend labour on the air
To bootless uses.
_Hephæstus._ Cursed handicraft!
I curse and hate thee, O my craft!
_Strength._ Why hate
Thy craft most plainly innocent of all
These pending ills?
_Hephæstus._ I would some other hand
Were here to work it!
_Strength._ All work hath its pain,
Except to rule the gods.
There is none free
Except King Zeus.
_Hephæstus._ I know it very well:
I argue not against it.
_Strength._ Why not, then,
Make haste and lock the fetters over HIM
Lest Zeus behold thee lagging?
_Hephæstus._ Here be chains.
Zeus may behold these.
_Strength._ Seize him: strike amain:
Strike with the hammer on each side his hands--
Rivet him to the rock.
_Hephæstus._ The work is done,
And thoroughly done.
_Strength._ Still faster grapple him;
Wedge him in deeper: leave no inch to stir.
He's terrible for finding a way out
From the irremediable.
_Hephæstus._ Here's an arm, at least,
Grappled past freeing.
_Strength._ Now then, buckle me
The other securely.
Let this wise one learn
He's duller than our Zeus.
_Hephæstus._ Oh, none but he
Accuse me justly.
_Strength._ Now, straight through the chest,
Take him and bite him with the clenching tooth
Of the adamantine wedge, and rivet him.
_Hephæstus._ Alas, Prometheus, what thou
sufferest here
I sorrow over.
_Strength._ Dost thou flinch again
And breathe groans for the enemies of Zeus?
Beware lest thine own pity find thee out.
_Hephæstus._ Thou dost behold a spectacle
that turns
The sight o' the eyes to pity.
_Strength._ I behold
A sinner suffer his sin's penalty.
But lash the thongs about his sides.
_Hephæstus._ So much,
I must do.
Urge no farther than I must.
_Strength._ Ay, but I _will_ urge!--and, with
shout on shout,
Will hound thee at this quarry.
Get thee down
And ring amain the iron round his legs.
_Hephæstus._ That work was not long doing.
_Strength._ Heavily now
Let fall the strokes upon the perforant gyves:
For He who rates the work has a heavy hand.
_Hephæstus._ Thy speech is savage as thy
shape.
_Strength._ Be thou
Gentle and tender! but revile not me
For the firm will and the untruckling hate.
_Hephæstus._ Let us go.
He is netted round with chains.
_Strength._ Here, now, taunt on! and having
spoiled the gods
Of honours, crown withal thy mortal men
Who live a whole day out.
Why how could _they_
Draw off from thee one single of thy griefs?
Methinks the Dæmons gave thee a wrong name,
"Prometheus," which means Providence,--because
Thou dost thyself need providence to see
Thy roll and ruin from the top of doom.
_Prometheus (alone)._ O holy Æther, and swift-wingèd
Winds,
And River-wells, and laughter innumerous
Of yon sea-waves!
Earth, mother of us all,
And all-viewing cyclic Sun, I cry on you,--
Behold me, a god, what I endure from gods!
Behold, with throe on throe,
How, wasted by this woe,
I wrestle down the myriad years of time!
Behold, how fast around me,
The new King of the happy ones sublime
Has flung the chain he forged, has shamed
and bound me!
Woe, woe! to-day's woe and the coming morrow's
I cover with one groan.
And where is found me
A limit to these sorrows?
And yet what word do I say?
I have foreknown
Clearly all things that should be; nothing
done
Comes sudden to my soul; and I must bear
What is ordained with patience, being aware
Necessity doth front the universe
With an invincible gesture.
Yet this curse
Which strikes me now, I find it hard to brave
In silence or in speech.
Because I gave
Honour to mortals, I have yoked my soul
To this compelling fate.
Because I stole
The secret fount of fire, whose bubbles went
Over the ferule's brim, and manward sent
Art's mighty means and perfect rudiment,
That sin I expiate in this agony,
Hung here in fetters, 'neath the blanching
sky.
Ah, ah me!
what a sound,
What a fragrance sweeps up from a pinion unseen
Of a god, or a mortal, or nature between,
Sweeping up to this rock where the earth has
her bound,
To have sight of my pangs or some guerdon
obtain.
Lo, a god in the anguish, a god in the chain!
The god, Zeus hateth sore
And his gods hate again,
As many as tread on his glorified floor,
Because I loved mortals too much evermore.
Alas me!
what a murmur and motion I hear,
As of birds flying near!
And the air undersings
The light stroke of their wings--
And all life that approaches I wait for in
fear.
_Chorus of Sea Nymphs, 1st Strophe._
Fear nothing! our troop
Floats lovingly up
With a quick-oaring stroke
Of wings steered to the rock,
Having softened the soul of our father below.
For the gales of swift-bearing have sent me
a sound,
And the clank of the iron, the malleted blow,
Smote down the profound
Of my caverns of old,
And struck the red light in a blush from my
brow,--
Till I sprang up unsandaled, in haste to behold,
And rushed forth on my chariot of wings manifold.
_Prometheus._ Alas me!--alas me!
Ye offspring of Tethys who bore at her breast
Many children, and eke of Oceanus, he
Coiling still around earth with perpetual
unrest!
Behold me and see
How transfixed with the fang
Of a fetter I hang
On the high-jutting rocks of this fissure
and keep
An uncoveted watch o'er the world and the
deep.
_Chorus, 1st Antistrophe._
I behold thee, Prometheus; yet now, yet now,
A terrible cloud whose rain is tears
Sweeps over mine eyes that witness how
Thy body appears
Hung awaste on the rocks by infrangible chains:
For new is the Hand, new the rudder that steers
The ship of Olympus through surge and wind--
And of old things passed, no track is behind.
_Prometheus._ Under earth, under Hades
Where the home of the shade is,
All into the deep, deep Tartarus,
I would he had hurled me adown.
I would he had plunged me, fastened thus
In the knotted chain with the savage clang,
All into the dark where there should be none,
Neither god nor another, to laugh and see.
But now the winds sing through and shake
The hurtling chains wherein I hang,
And I, in my naked sorrows, make
Much mirth for my enemy.
_Chorus, 2nd Strophe._
Nay! who of the gods hath a heart so stern
As to use thy woe for a mock and mirth?
Who would not turn more mild to learn
Thy sorrows? who of the heaven and earth
Save Zeus?
But he
Right wrathfully
Bears on his sceptral soul unbent
And rules thereby the heavenly seed,
Nor will he pause till he content
His thirsty heart in a finished deed;
Or till Another shall appear,
To win by fraud, to seize by fear
The hard-to-be-captured government.
_Prometheus._ Yet even of _me_ he shall have
need,
That monarch of the blessed seed,
Of me, of me, who now am cursed
By his fetters dire,--
To wring my secret out withal
And learn by whom his sceptre shall
Be filched from him--as was, at first,
His heavenly fire.
But he never shall enchant me
With his honey-lipped persuasion;
Never, never shall he daunt me
With the oath and threat of passion
Into speaking as they want me,
Till he loose this savage chain,
And accept the expiation
Of my sorrow, in his pain.
_Chorus, 2nd Antistrophe._
Thou art, sooth, a brave god,
And, for all thou hast borne
From the stroke of the rod,
Nought relaxest from scorn.
But thou speakest unto me
Too free and unworn;
And a terror strikes through me
And festers my soul
And I fear, in the roll
Of the storm, for thy fate
In the ship far from shore:
Since the son of Saturnus is hard in his hate
And unmoved in his heart evermore.
_Prometheus._ I know that Zeus is stern;
I know he metes his justice by his will;
And yet, his soul shall learn
More softness when once broken by this ill:
And curbing his unconquerable vaunt
He shall rush on in fear to meet with me
Who rush to meet with him in agony,
To issues of harmonious covenant.
_Chorus._ Remove the veil from all things
and relate
The story to us,--of what crime accused,
Zeus smites thee with dishonourable pangs.
Speak: if to teach us do not grieve thyself.
_Prometheus._ The utterance of these things
is torture to me,
But so, too, is their silence; each way lies
Woe strong as fate.
When gods began with wrath,
And war rose up between their starry brows,
Some choosing to cast Chronos from his throne
That Zeus might king it there, and some in
haste
With opposite oaths that they would have no
Zeus
To rule the gods for ever,--I, who brought
The counsel I thought meetest, could not move
The Titans, children of the Heaven and Earth,
What time, disdaining in their rugged souls
My subtle machinations, they assumed
It was an easy thing for force to take
The mastery of fate.
My mother, then,
Who is called not only Themis but Earth too,
(Her single beauty joys in many names)
Did teach me with reiterant prophecy
What future should be, and how conquering
gods
Should not prevail by strength and violence
But by guile only.
When I told them so,
They would not deign to contemplate the truth
On all sides round; whereat I deemed it best
To lead my willing mother upwardly
And set my Themis face to face with Zeus
As willing to receive her.
Tartarus,
With its abysmal cloister of the Dark,
Because I gave that counsel, covers up
The antique Chronos and his siding hosts,
And, by that counsel helped, the king of gods
Hath recompensed me with these bitter pangs:
For kingship wears a cancer at the heart,--
Distrust in friendship.
Do ye also ask
What crime it is for which he tortures me?
That shall be clear before you.
When at first
He filled his father's throne, he instantly
Made various gifts of glory to the gods
And dealt the empire out.
Alone of men,
Of miserable men, he took no count,
But yearned to sweep their track off from
the world
And plant a newer race there.
Not a god
Resisted such desire except myself.
_I_ dared it!
_I_ drew mortals back to light,
From meditated ruin deep as hell!
For which wrong, I am bent down in these pangs
Dreadful to suffer, mournful to behold,
And I, who pitied man, am thought myself
Unworthy of pity; while I render out
Deep rhythms of anguish 'neath the harping
hand
That strikes me thus--a sight to shame your
Zeus!
_Chorus._ Hard as thy chains and cold as all
these rocks
Is he, Prometheus, who withholds his heart
From joining in thy woe.
I yearned before
To fly this sight; and, now I gaze on it,
I sicken inwards.
_Prometheus._ To my friends, indeed,
I must be a sad sight.
_Chorus._ And didst thou sin
No more than so?
_Prometheus._ I did restrain besides
My mortals from premeditating death.
_Chorus._ How didst thou medicine the plague-fear
of death?
_Prometheus._ I set blind Hopes to inhabit
in their house.
_Chorus._ By that gift thou didst help thy
mortals well.
_Prometheus._ I gave them also fire.
_Chorus._ And have they now,
Those creatures of a day, the red-eyed fire?
_Prometheus._ They have: and shall learn by
it many arts.
_Chorus._ And truly for such sins Zeus tortures
thee
And will remit no anguish?
Is there set
No limit before thee to thine agony?
_Prometheus._ No other: only what seems good
to HIM.
_Chorus._ And how will it seem good?
what hope remains?
Seest thou not that thou hast sinned?
But that thou hast sinned
It glads me not to speak of, and grieves thee:
Then let it pass from both, and seek thyself
Some outlet from distress.
_Prometheus._ It is in truth
An easy thing to stand aloof from pain
And lavish exhortation and advice
On one vexed sorely by it.
I have known
All in prevision.
By my choice, my choice,
I freely sinned--I will confess my sin--
And helping mortals, found my own despair.
I did not think indeed that I should pine
Beneath such pangs against such skyey rocks,
Doomed to this drear hill and no neighbouring
Of any life: but mourn not ye for griefs
I bear to-day: hear rather, dropping down
To the plain, how other woes creep on to me,
And learn the consummation of my doom.
Beseech you, nymphs, beseech you, grieve for
me
Who now am grieving; for Grief walks the earth,
And sits down at the foot of each by turns.
_Chorus._ We hear the deep clash of thy words,
Prometheus, and obey.
And I spring with a rapid foot away
From the rushing car and the holy air,
The track of birds;
And I drop to the rugged ground and there
Await the tale of thy despair.
_OCEANUS enters._
_Oceanus._ I reach the bourn of my weary road
Where I may see and answer thee,
Prometheus, in thine agony.
On the back of the quick-winged bird I glode,
And I bridled him in
With the will of a god.
Behold, thy sorrow aches in me
Constrained by the force of kin.
Nay, though that tie were all undone,
For the life of none beneath the sun
Would I seek a larger benison
Than I seek for thine.
And thou shalt learn my words are truth,--
That no fair parlance of the mouth
Grows falsely out of mine.
Now give me a deed to prove my faith;
For no faster friend is named in breath
Than I, Oceanus, am thine.
_Prometheus._ Ha! what has brought thee?
Hast thou also come
To look upon my woe?
How hast thou dared
To leave the depths called after thee, the
caves
Self-hewn and self-roofed with spontaneous
rock,
To visit earth, the mother of my chain?
Hast come indeed to view my doom and mourn
That I should sorrow thus?
Gaze on, and see
How I, the fast friend of your Zeus,--how
I
The erector of the empire in his hand,
Am bent beneath that hand, in this despair.
_Oceanus._ Prometheus, I behold: and I would
fain
Exhort thee, though already subtle enough,
To a better wisdom.
Titan, know thyself,
And take new softness to thy manners since
A new king rules the gods.
If words like these,
Harsh words and trenchant, thou wilt fling
abroad,
Zeus haply, though he sit so far and high,
May hear thee do it, and so, this wrath of
his
Which now affects thee fiercely, shall appear
A mere child's sport at vengeance.
Wretched god,
Rather dismiss the passion which thou hast,
And seek a change from grief.
Perhaps I seem
To address thee with old saws and outworn
sense,--
Yet such a curse, Prometheus, surely waits
On lips that speak too proudly: thou, meantime,
Art none the meeker, nor dost yield a jot
To evil circumstance, preparing still
To swell the account of grief with other griefs
Than what are borne.
Beseech thee, use me then
For counsel: do not spurn against the pricks,--
Seeing that who reigns, reigns by cruelty
Instead of right.
And now, I go from hence,
And will endeavour if a power of mine
Can break thy fetters through.
For thee,--be calm,
And smooth thy words from passion.
Knowest thou not
Of perfect knowledge, thou who knowest too
much,
That where the tongue wags, ruin never lags?
_Prometheus._ I gratulate thee who hast shared
and dared
All things with me, except their penalty.
Enough so! leave these thoughts.
It cannot be
That thou shouldst move HIM.
HE may _not_ be moved;
And _thou_ beware of sorrow on this road.
_Oceanus._ Ay! ever wiser for another's use
Than thine! the event, and not the prophecy,
Attests it to me.
Yet where now I rush,
Thy wisdom hath no power to drag me back;
Because I glory, glory, to go hence
And win for thee deliverance from thy pangs,
As a free gift from Zeus.
_Prometheus._ Why there, again,
I give thee gratulation and applause.
Thou lackest no goodwill.
But, as for deeds,
Do nought! 'twere all done vainly; helping
nought,
Whatever thou wouldst do.
Rather take rest
And keep thyself from evil.
If I grieve,
I do not therefore wish to multiply
The griefs of others.
Verily, not so!
For still my brother's doom doth vex my soul,--
My brother Atlas, standing in the west,
Shouldering the column of the heaven and earth,
A difficult burden!
I have also seen,
And pitied as I saw, the earth-born one,
The inhabitant of old Cilician caves,
The great war-monster of the hundred heads,
(All taken and bowed beneath the violent Hand,)
Typhon the fierce, who did resist the gods,
And, hissing slaughter from his dreadful jaws,
Flash out ferocious glory from his eyes
As if to storm the throne of Zeus.
Whereat,
The sleepless arrow of Zeus flew straight
at him,
The headlong bolt of thunder breathing flame,
And struck him downward from his eminence
Of exultation; through the very soul,
It struck him, and his strength was withered
up
To ashes, thunder-blasted.
Now he lies
A helpless trunk supinely, at full length
Beside the strait of ocean, spurred into
By roots of Ætna; high upon whose tops
Hephæstus sits and strikes the flashing ore.
From thence the rivers of fire shall burst
away
Hereafter, and devour with savage jaws
The equal plains of fruitful Sicily,
Such passion he shall boil back in hot darts
Of an insatiate fury and sough of flame,
Fallen Typhon,--howsoever struck and charred
By Zeus's bolted thunder.
But for thee,
Thou art not so unlearned as to need
My teaching--let thy knowledge save thyself.
_I_ quaff the full cup of a present doom,
And wait till Zeus hath quenched his will
in wrath.
_Oceanus._ Prometheus, art thou ignorant of
this,
That words do medicine anger?
_Prometheus._ If the word
With seasonable softness touch the soul
And, where the parts are ulcerous, sear them
not
By any rudeness.
_Oceanus._ With a noble aim
To dare as nobly--is there harm in _that_?
Dost thou discern it?
Teach me.
_Prometheus._ I discern
Vain aspiration, unresultive work.
_Oceanus._ Then suffer me to bear the brunt
of this!
Since it is profitable that one who is wise
Should seem not wise at all.
_Prometheus._ And such would seem
My very crime.
_Oceanus._ In truth thine argument
Sends me back home.
_Prometheus._ Lest any lament for me
Should cast thee down to hate.
_Oceanus._ The hate of him
Who sits a new king on the absolute throne?
_Prometheus._ Beware of him, lest thine heart
grieve by him.
_Oceanus._ Thy doom, Prometheus, be my teacher!
_Prometheus._ Go.
Depart--beware--and keep the mind thou hast.
_Oceanus._ Thy words drive after, as I rush
before.
Lo! my four-footed bird sweeps smooth and
wide
The flats of air with balanced pinions, glad
To bend his knee at home in the ocean-stall.
[_OCEANUS departs._
_Chorus, 1st Strophe._
I moan thy fate, I moan for thee,
Prometheus!
From my eyes too tender,
Drop after drop incessantly
The tears of my heart's pity render
My cheeks wet from their fountains free;
Because that Zeus, the stern and cold,
Whose law is taken from his breast,
Uplifts his sceptre manifest
Over the gods of old.
_1st Antistrophe._
All the land is moaning
With a murmured plaint to-day;
All the mortal nations
Having habitations
In the holy Asia
Are a dirge entoning
For thine honour and thy brothers',
Once majestic beyond others
In the old belief,--
Now are groaning in the groaning
Of thy deep-voiced grief.
_2nd Strophe._
Mourn the maids inhabitant
Of the Colchian land,
Who with white, calm bosoms stand
In the battle's roar:
Mourn the Scythian tribes that haunt
The verge of earth, Mæotis' shore.
_2nd Antistrophe._
Yea!
Arabia's battle-crown,
And dwellers in the beetling town
Mount Caucasus sublimely nears,--
An iron squadron, thundering down
With the sharp-prowed spears.
But one other before, have I seen to remain
By invincible pain
Bound and vanquished,--one Titan! 'twas Atlas,
who bears
In a curse from the gods, by that strength
of his own
Which he evermore wears,
The weight of the heaven on his shoulder alone,
While he sighs up the stars;
And the tides of the ocean wail bursting their
bars,--
Murmurs still the profound,
And black Hades roars up through the chasm
of the ground,
And the fountains of pure-running rivers moan
low
In a pathos of woe.
_Prometheus._ Beseech you, think not I am
silent thus
Through pride or scorn.
I only gnaw my heart
With meditation, seeing myself so wronged.
For see--their honours to these new-made gods,
What other gave but I, and dealt them out
With distribution?
Ay--but here I am dumb!
For here, I should repeat your knowledge to
you,
If I spake aught.
List rather to the deeds
I did for mortals; how, being fools before,
I made them wise and true in aim of soul.
And let me tell you--not as taunting men,
But teaching you the intention of my gifts,
How, first beholding, they beheld in vain,
And hearing, heard not, but, like shapes in
dreams,
Mixed all things wildly down the tedious time,
Nor knew to build a house against the sun
With wickered sides, nor any woodcraft knew,
But lived, like silly ants, beneath the ground
In hollow caves unsunned.
There, came to them
No steadfast sign of winter, nor of spring
Flower-perfumed, nor of summer full of fruit,
But blindly and lawlessly they did all things,
Until I taught them how the stars do rise
And set in mystery, and devised for them
Number, the inducer of philosophies,
The synthesis of Letters, and, beside,
The artificer of all things, Memory,
That sweet Muse-mother.
I was first to yoke
The servile beasts in couples, carrying
An heirdom of man's burdens on their backs.
I joined to chariots, steeds, that love the
bit
They champ at--the chief pomp of golden ease.
And none but I originated ships,
The seaman's chariots, wandering on the brine
With linen wings.
And I--oh, miserable!--
Who did devise for mortals all these arts,
Have no device left now to save myself
From the woe I suffer.
_Chorus._ Most unseemly woe
Thou sufferest, and dost stagger from the
sense
Bewildered! like a bad leech falling sick
Thou art faint at soul, and canst not find
the drugs
Required to save thyself.
_Prometheus._ Hearken the rest,
And marvel further, what more arts and means
I did invent,--this, greatest: if a man
Fell sick, there was no cure, nor esculent
Nor chrism nor liquid, but for lack of drugs
Men pined and wasted, till I showed them all
Those mixtures of emollient remedies
Whereby they might be rescued from disease.
I fixed the various rules of mantic art,
Discerned the vision from the common dream,
Instructed them in vocal auguries
Hard to interpret, and defined as plain
The wayside omens,--flights of crook-clawed
birds,--
Showed which are, by their nature, fortunate,
And which not so, and what the food of each,
And what the hates, affections, social needs,
Of all to one another,--taught what sign
Of visceral lightness, coloured to a shade,
May charm the genial gods, and what fair spots
Commend the lung and liver.
Burning so
The limbs encased in fat, and the long chine,
I led my mortals on to an art abstruse,
And cleared their eyes to the image in the
fire,
Erst filmed in dark.
Enough said now of this
For the other helps of man hid underground,
The iron and the brass, silver and gold,
Can any dare affirm he found them out
Before me?
none, I know! unless he choose
To lie in his vaunt.
In one word learn the whole,--
That all arts came to mortals from Prometheus.
_Chorus._ Give mortals now no inexpedient
help,
Neglecting thine own sorrow.
I have hope still
To see thee, breaking from the fetter here,
Stand up as strong as Zeus.
_Prometheus._ This ends not thus,
The oracular fate ordains.
I must be bowed
By infinite woes and pangs, to escape this
chain
Necessity is stronger than mine art.
_Chorus._ Who holds the helm of that Necessity?
_Prometheus._ The threefold Fates and the
unforgetting Furies.
_Chorus._ Is Zeus less absolute than these
are?
_Prometheus._ Yea,
And therefore cannot fly what is ordained.
_Chorus._ What is ordained for Zeus, except
to be
A king for ever?
_Prometheus._ 'Tis too early yet
For thee to learn it: ask no more.
_Chorus._ Perhaps
Thy secret may be something holy?
_Prometheus._ Turn
To another matter: this, it is not time
To speak abroad, but utterly to veil
In silence.
For by that same secret kept,
I 'scape this chain's dishonour and its woe.
_Chorus, 1st Strophe._
Never, oh never
May Zeus, the all-giver,
Wrestle down from his throne
In that might of his own
To antagonize mine!
Nor let me delay
As I bend on my way
Toward the gods of the shrine
Where the altar is full
Of the blood of the bull,
Near the tossing brine
Of Ocean my father.
May no sin be sped in the word that is said,
But my vow be rather
Consummated,
Nor evermore fail, nor evermore pine.
_1st Antistrophe._
'Tis sweet to have
Life lengthened out
With hopes proved brave
By the very doubt,
Till the spirit enfold
Those manifest joys which were foretold.
But I thrill to behold
Thee, victim doomed,
By the countless cares
And the drear despairs
Forever consumed,--
And all because thou, who art fearless now
Of Zeus above,
Didst overflow for mankind below
With a free-souled, reverent love.
Ah friend, behold and see!
What's all the beauty of humanity?
Can it be fair?
What's all the strength? is it strong?
And what hope can they bear,
These dying livers--living one day long?
Ah, seest thou not, my friend,
How feeble and slow
And like a dream, doth go
This poor blind manhood, drifted from its
end?
And how no mortal wranglings can confuse
The harmony of Zeus?
Prometheus, I have learnt these things
From the sorrow in thy face.
Another song did fold its wings
Upon my lips in other days,
When round the bath and round the bed
The hymeneal chant instead
I sang for thee, and smiled,--
And thou didst lead, with gifts and vows,
Hesione, my father's child,
To be thy wedded spouse.
_IO enters_.